>> Partial funding for this
program was provided by the
Nathan Cummings Foundation.
Frontline is made possible by
contributions to your PBS
station from viewers like you.
Thank you.
>> There's never been a company
like it.
>> Wal-Mart is probably the
broadest and most powerful
company in U.S. business
history.
>> Its everyday low prices
benefit millions of Americans.
>> Wal-Mart has really given an
increase in income to every
American.
>> But some say it's a bad
bargain.
>> It's putting people out of
work.
That's what it's done.
>> 25.
Can I get 25?
>> Unfortunately, plants are
shut down of this caliber.
>> Tonight, Corespondent Hedrick
Smith investigates how Wal-Mart
is changing the American
economy...
>> The Chinese guys bought the
big machines?
>> ...following the trail of low
prices in America to low-cost
production in China...
>> I said, "Hold it, hold it,
hold it.
The next one's China.
I got to get here."
>> ...tracking the nation's
growing trade deficit...
>> Wal-Mart's our number-one
customer.
>> SMITH: Wal-Mart's
your number-one customer?
>> Number-one customer.
> ...and examining the growing
controversy over the Wal-Mart
way.
>> The lowest prices have to
lead to the lowest wages and to
job loss, and to lower living
standards.
>> Tonight on Frontline: is
Wal-Mart good for America?
>> SMITH: It's 6:00 A.M. at the
university arena in
Fayetteville, Arkansas, and the
faithful are gathering.
>> Yeah!
>> SMITH: They've come to cheer
their home team.
But this isn't your typical home
team.
>> Give me a "W!"
>> "W!"
>> Give me an "A!"
>> "A!"
>> Give me an "L!"
>> "L!"
>> Give me a squiggly.
>> Squiggly!
>> ( crowd cheering )
Squiggly!
>> SMITH: This is team Wal-Mart,
and this is a shareholder's
meeting unlike any other.
>> Give me a "T!"
>> "T!"
>> What's that spell?
>> Wal-Mart!
>> Whose Wal-Mart is it?
>> Our Wal-Mart!
>> Who's number one?
>> The customer, always!
>> SMITH: And Wal-Mart is a
company unlike any other.
>> Your company was the first
company on the planet to report
one-quarter of a trillion
dollars in sales-- $256 billion.
( cheers and applause )
Do you know what that is?
That's one IBM, one Hewlett-
Packard, one Dell computer, one
Microsoft and one Cisco System.
And, oh, by the way, after that
we've got $2 billion left over.
>> SMITH: As the world's largest
company, Wal-Mart has tremendous
power and influence.
It is now the model not just for
retailing, but for companies all
across the corporate landscape.
>> ♪ I'm doing my part
for my Wal-Mart... ♪
>> In the 19th Century, it was
the Pennsylvania Railroad, which
called itself the standard of
the world.
Early 20th Century, it might
have been U.S. Steel.
General Motors, of course, in
the mid-20th Century.
But clearly, Wal-Mart today is
setting sort of a... new
standards that other firms have
to follow if they hope to
compete.
And more than just other firms,
it's setting standards for the
nation as a whole.
( crowd cheering )
>> SMITH: By figuring out how to
exploit two powerful forces that
converged in the '90s-- the rise
of information technology and
the explosion of the global
economy-- Wal-Mart has changed
the balance of power in the
world of business.
>> It used to be that
manufacturers, big multinational
manufacturers, had the most
power, companies like General
Motors and General Electric.
Today, I think that global
retailers actually have become
the most powerful companies in
the global economy.
>> SMITH: To understand Wal-Mart
and how a company with such
humble roots has managed to
build a global empire, I headed
for Bentonville, Arkansas.
It's an overgrown crossroads
town tucked into the bible and
barbecue belt of northwest
Arkansas.
Here, in the heart of the old
town, sits the five-and-dime
store that Sam Walton opened in
1950.
A few blocks away I found the
Wal-Mart of today, the Wal-Mart
we've come to know as consumers,
a cornucopia of thousands of
different items all under one
roof-- the epitome of one-stop
shopping.
>> How you all doing today?
Thank you for coming to Wal-
Mart.
>> SMITH: Every week, Wal-Mart
says, 100 million American
shoppers stream into its 3,400
stores.
>> It's very convenient for me
to be able to get a one-stop
shop.
>> I know I don't have to look
and see where I can save the
most money.
I know when I come in here I can
save money.
>> Good prices.
Good quality of stuff.
>> I'm thinking about having my
social security check direct-
deposited to Wal-Mart, since I
buy everything at Wal-Mart.
>> What makes Wal-Mart
successful, what keeps us
motivated, and what really
challenges us every day, whether
it was from the day one when
Wal-Mart began or until today, I
think it's the same:
that we really strive in
everything we do to keep our
costs as low as possible so that
we can provide the customer a
value and still make a
reasonable profit for us, for
our company.
>> SMITH: That was Sam Walton's
formula: buy cheap, sell for
less than the other guy, and
make your profit on high volume
and fast turnover.
Sounds simple, but this
supercenter is a world away from
Sam's five-and-dime.
How do they keep track of it
all?
How do they know what to stock?
How do they keep prices so low?
>> What I'm going to do is show
you how we use this Telxon unit
in our stores.
>> SMITH: Linda Dillman is Wal-
Mart's chief information
officer...
>> Here we have a display of
flashlights.
>> SMITH: Right.
...and she let me in on one of
Wal-Mart's most important tools,
a little gadget called a Telxon.
>> It tells me the sale price of
the item, how many I currently
have.
And it knows what the history
looks like for tracking each
sale as it occurs.
We know what we think it will do
going forward based on its
trend.
>> SMITH: Wal-Mart was one of
the first retailers to
understand the power of
information hidden in the bar
code.
This little barcode here is not
just a simple thing, it's almost
an encyclopedia of information.
>> Absolutely.
It allows us to tie this item to
a lot of information we know
about it that we can only
collect because we have that
barcode.
>> SMITH: How many items do you
have in a store like this?
>> Over 100,000.
So close to 120,000 items.
>> SMITH: Wal-Mart couldn't
manage without the barcode.
It helps them overcome one of
retailing's thorniest problems:
getting the right mix of
products in the store.
>> You can track sales on
specific items, specific weeks,
specific days, specific hours of
the day.
>> SMITH: Jon Lehman worked at
Wal-Mart for 17 years.
He managed six different stores.
Disillusioned, he quit to go
work for a union trying to
organize Wal-Mart workers.
>> You can track sales spikes
during the year, during certain
seasonal periods and...
>> SMITH: Clothes, sizes...
>> It's incredible.
Clothes, sizes, colors, flavors,
all of those things.
It's... it's just... It's really
incredible.
>> SMITH: With its own
supercomputer, Wal-Mart
streamlined its supply chain,
speeding delivery from plant to
store shelf.
>> The sale is recorded, and
then an order is automatically
generated that evening at
midnight.
And that warehouse fills that
order, and it's sitting back on
the shelf the next night or the
following night.
>> SMITH: Wal-Mart became a
world leader in logistics, and
promoted greater efficiency
among its suppliers.
Some analysts even credit Wal-
Mart with increasing U.S.
productivity.
>> Wal-Mart, as an efficiency
machine, has just done better
than any other U.S. retailer, or
perhaps any other U.S. company
in history.
>> SMITH: With other mass retail
chains like Target and K-Mart,
Wal-Mart generated a revolution
in how goods are produced, a
shift from what's called "push
production" to "pull
production."
>> The push system involves
manufacturers deciding what
they're going to produce and
then trying to get retailers to
buy it and sell it for them.
The pull system involves
retailers deciding what is being
sold, collecting information on
what is being sold, and then
telling the manufacturers what
to produce and when to produce
it based on what is actually
being sold.
>> SMITH: Wal-Mart's pull is so
powerful that here in
Bentonville, manufacturers have
set up satellite sales offices.
In what's now known as
Vendorville, I found a who's-who
of Wal-Mart vendors.
In one corporate office park, I
found a sock manufacturer,
Kentucky Derby Hosiery.
Its CEO is Bill Nichol.
>> Yes, if you want to sell
Wal-Mart, you know, you need to
come to Bentonville.
It's been that way for a long
time.
I don't see that that's going to
change.
So people who travel a lot found
it may be more convenient just
to have an office here; that
they were continuously coming to
Bentonville.
So a lot of them just moved
here, or at least opened an
office here.
>> SMITH: The suppliers come in
droves, hungry for big
contracts.
They get herded into little
rooms for bargaining sessions
with Wal-Mart buyers.
>> They force all of us, by
really good business discipline,
to be sure we're paying
attention at all times to what
their customers want to buy.
It serves the purpose of saying,
"This is what they want, and
they want to buy it at this
price; therefore, that's what
we'd better be doing," our
little company.
>> SMITH: The focus is on what
matters most to Wal-Mart:
prices.
>> Well, it's very one-sided.
There is no negotiation.
There's not much negotiation at
all.
The manufacturer walks into the
room-- I've been in these little
cubicles; I've seen it happen--
the buyer says, "Look, we want
you to sell it to us for 5% on a
dollar at cost, lower this year
than you did last year."
They know every fact and figure
that these manufacturers have.
They know their books, they know
their costs, they know their
business practices, everything,
you know.
So, what's a manufacturer left
to do?
They sit naked in front of Wal-
Mart.
You know, Wal-Mart calls the
shots.
"If you want to do business with
us, if you want to stay in
business, then you're going to
do it our way."
And it's all about driving down
the cost of goods.
>> The power of Wal-Mart is
such, it's reversed a 100-year
history in which the
manufacturer was powerful and
the retailer was sort of the
vassal.
It's changed that.
It turned that around entirely.
Now the retailer, the mass
global retailer, is the...
that's the center, that's the
power, and the manufacturer
becomes the serf, the vassal,
the underling who has to do the
bidding of the retailer.
That's a new thing.
>> SMITH: I wanted to see how
this bold new world of retail
power had changed the game for
established brand-name
manufacturers.
So I headed to Wooster, Ohio, a
small college town and longtime
home to one of America's best-
known brands: Rubbermaid, maker
of plastic pails, garbage cans,
and all kinds of containers.
>> We were one of the best-known
brand names in America because
we were in virtually every home,
one way or another.
>> SMITH: Very, very impressive
display here.
Stanley Gault was CEO of
Rubbermaid through the 1980s and
early '90s.
Gault bet Rubbermaid's future on
supplying big-box discount
chains like Wal-Mart.
>> The tea leaves said you
better be a part of this
growing... of these growing new
segments.
They provide a tremendous
opportunity for growth and for
volume sales.
And they can take a new product
and make it a success overnight.
>> SMITH: One of Gault's rising
lieutenants was Wolfgang
Schmitt, who would later become
CEO.
>> Well, there was a dramatic
shift over a relatively short
period of time as we went from
thousands of customers that we
were selling to, to where five
or seven of our customers
represented two-thirds of our
volume.
>> SMITH: These big-box
retailers.
>> The big-box, mass merchants.
You have to have a very tight
relationship with them, and you
have to be important to them.
>> SMITH: No customer was more
important to Gault than
Wal-Mart.
>> When I came to Rubbermaid,
they did not sell Wal-Mart.
They were selling to K-Mart, but
they wouldn't sell Wal-Mart.
Well, within a short period of
time, Wal-Mart... Really within
a year, they were our largest
company.
>> Tired of dragging your
garbage to the end of the
driveway?
Then roll it with a Rough Neck
Wheeled Refuse Container from
Rubbermaid.
Heavy-duty construction...
>> SMITH: The Wal-Mart account
helped fuel Rubbermaid's rapid
growth.
Sales and profits soared.
>> Rubbermaid: ideas that last.
>> SMITH: Its products were so
highly regarded for quality that
Rubbermaid was voted the
nation's most-admired company in
1994.
>> It's really your peer group,
the other manufacturers out
there in the world, saying,
"This is the company that is
really doing it, they're doing
all the things right, and
they're doing the things that
make them very admired-- our
brand name, our quality, our
product development."
>> SMITH: But behind the
headlines, Rubbermaid was
struggling to maintain its
ambitious growth targets.
Then suddenly it found itself in
a showdown with its biggest
customer.
>> The price of resin
skyrocketed.
And resin is a huge component of
any plastic product that you
make.
And when we went out with a
price increase across the
industry to all retailers,
saying, "Our raw material costs
have increased significantly.
We have to get a price increase
for our products," Wal-Mart
would not take that price
increase.
They flat-out refused to take
the price increase.
>> SMITH: Other mass retailers
agreed to a price hike, and
Rubbermaid's CEO flew to
Arkansas to ask Bill Fields,
head of Wal-Mart stores, to
reconsider.
>> They were very public in
those days, as you might recall,
as were a lot of retailers,
about saying, "One of the
advantages we as big-box
retailers have is we can put the
hammer to the manufacturers and
we can give American consumers
lower prices."
>> SMITH: So did Fields put the
hammer to you?
>> Oh, in his own way,
certainly.
>> I thought it was a vindictive
kind of meeting that said,
"Yes, you may be Rubbermaid, and
you're a big Rubbermaid, and you
got the great name and all that,
but you're not going to tell us
what to do.
And we're not going to take your
price increase, and we really
don't care what it does to you."
>> SMITH: So what does it mean
to you?
Do you lose shelf space, do you
lose volume to Wal-Mart at that
point?
>> Sure.
You know, when push comes to
shove, their way of disciplining
the supplier is to show that,
you know, volume can be given or
it can be taken.
>> And they dropped a number of
our products for a couple years,
just dropped those products.
That impacts the company
tremendously.
To me, it was one of the first
signs of the decline of
Rubbermaid.
>> SMITH: I asked a Wal-Mart
spokesman about the clash with
Rubbermaid because Bill Fields,
no longer at Wal-Mart, didn't
answer Frontline's inquiries.
>> Whatever happened there, I'm
sorry I can't comment because I
it predates me and I'm not
familiar with the specifics.
But I would just reemphasize
that it is not our intent to be
bullies as buyers to our
suppliers.
>> SMITH: Wal-Mart's pullback
was a body blow to Rubbermaid.
Coupled with lax management at
Rubbermaid, it plunged the
company into deep trouble.
In 1999, Rubbermaid sold out to
Newell, a major competitor.
By the time I arrived in
Wooster, five years later, it
had come to this...
( Auctioneer calling out
prices )
>> SMITH: ...Rubbermaid
auctioning off its birthright.
( Auctioneer calling out
prices )
>> SMITH: Where are the buyers
from?
>> They're from all over.
We've got guys from all over the
50 states.
We've got two guys in from South
America, two guys from Italy, a
guy from Spain, two guys from
over in Japan or China area.
>> SMITH: A couple of guys from
China?
>> Yeah.
>> SMITH: And they're buying
here?
>> They're buying... they bought
the one big machine today, yeah.
>> SMITH: The Chinese guys
bought the big machine?
>> Right.
It's an injection machine.
They bought it, I believe, for
$850,000.
>> SMITH: So Rubbermaid's
original plant was closing shop,
and countries like China were
picking up the pieces.
>> You know, when you think of
Wooster, you think of
Rubbermaid; and you think of
Rubbermaid, you think of
Wooster.
I mean, this is what this town
is all about.
>> SMITH: So what's it going to
be without... when you move all
this stuff out; you've got a
carcass here.
>> Exactly.
>> SMITH: I mean, is the town a
carcass, too?
>> Well there is about 1,000
jobs that were lost here.
Close to 1,000 jobs.
>> SMITH: It seemed to me that
it wasn't just a plant dying; a
set of corporate values was
passing away.
Ten years ago, Rubbermaid, with
its reputation for quality, was
named "Most Admired."
Last year, Wal-Mart, known for
its cost-cutting, was most
admired.
If you look at the shift from
Rubbermaid as the most-admired
company in 1994, and Wal-Mart as
the most-admired company today,
in terms of the larger American
economy, what does that mean?
What does that say about the
touchstones of success?
>> Rubbermaid represented an
innovation-oriented high road
towards U.S. competitiveness.
I think Wal-Mart represents a
cost-driven, low-price, low road
towards U.S. competitiveness.
And, in a sense, they're two
dramatically different styles in
which the U.S. economy can be
organized.
I think the Wal-Mart model is
winning out.
>> Good morning, associates.
I need all available
associates...
>> SMITH: Back at the
supercenter in Bentonville,
employees gather for the morning
meeting, a daily ritual at 5,000
Wal-Mart stores all over the
world.
It's part of the Wal-Mart
culture.
>> Good morning, everybody.
>> Good morning, Matt.
Whoo!
>> Is everybody doing all right?
Okay, let's talk about sales.
We had a good day yesterday.
We're up 6.5%.
Meat was up 19.2% yesterday.
>> SMITH: It's a pep rally
around Sam Walton's low-cost,
low-price formula for success.
( applause )
>> Way to go.
Who else has got an item?
>> 88 cents, has an 85.23%
markup.
Great item.
>> All right.
>> They're $1.50 for 24, and a
30% markup.
>> All right.
Good item.
>> 96 cents socks.
>> SMITH: Pay close attention.
What they're talking about is
how Wal-Mart pulls in millions
of shoppers by touting what it
calls the "opening price point."
>> Then we have Simply Basic
socks for your dollar, with 94
cents.
>> Awesome.
>> We sell... in all the colors
we sell about 60 pairs a week.
>> Okay.
>> SMITH: Opening price points
are the rock-bottom prices that
Wal-Mart showcases in special
displays-- the $9.14 saucepan,
trick-or-treat jack-o-lanterns
for 78 cents.
>> The opening price point is
clearly a foundation of who we
are and how we interact with our
customers.
We feel that they need to have
the best product, the best value
at the best price we can
achieve.
>> It's the heart of Wal-Mart's
pricing strategy.
Wal-Mart puts tremendous amount
of planning, organization, and
thinking into what their opening
price points are going to be
based on last year's sales,
based on customer requests.
>> SMITH: Every line of goods
has an opening price point, the
cheapest item in the line.
For example, this $29.87
microwave oven.
It's a good price, but it's also
the bait to lure customers to
that department.
>> Just to get you in.
You look at that and you think,
"Wow, what a great price."
And then they got you, because
you walk about ten more feet and
you see the item you really want
in that same category.
Then you buy that item, but it's
not going to be, probably, the
lowest price in town.
>> SMITH: So are you saying that
the opening price is the lowest
price and actually will beat the
competition, but maybe other
items in the same category
aren't necessarily the lowest
price?
>> Oh, absolutely not.
Once you walk past that opening
price point, they got you,
because you've already formed
the perception that everything
in that department is the lowest
price in town.
>> SMITH: And maybe it's not.
>> No, it's not.
No, I can tell you it's not.
I can tell you from experience
it's not.
>> SMITH: Back in the 1950s, Sam
Walton dreamed up the idea of an
eye-popping opening price point.
>> Sam had an old Ford pickup
truck, and he'd go down the road
and buy ladies' panties and sell
them at a ridiculous low price,
you know, ten for a buck, or
something like that.
>> SMITH: And it worked.
Sam got a jump on bigger rivals
by targeting territory they
ignored, building his early
stores near small towns in the
south.
>> One thing you have to think
about in the history about us is
that we are a company that
hasn't been that long ago that
we were a regional player.
What we found is we had to
compete with, as a regional
player, those that were national
players.
How do we do that?
We had to go overseas to find
products in some cases.
In the '70s and '80s, Sam Walton
would travel overseas looking
for goods that would sell in our
stores.
>> SMITH: Despite Wal-Mart's
much publicized Buy American
campaign in the late '80s, low-
cost imports from Asia became a
vital component of Wal-Mart's
low opening price point
strategy.
>> They were more single-minded
in terms of global cost cutting
and internal efficiency than any
other U.S. retailer.
And that helps us understand how
and why they were able to pass
companies like K-Mart and Sears
that were the early leaders in
U.S. retailing and offshore
sourcing.
>> There was a lot of talk about
those companies being asleep at
the wheel, being fat, dumb, and
happy, you know.
And we didn't want to be fat,
dumb, and happy.
We wanted to be aggressive.
>> SMITH: And they were
aggressive.
From 38 stores in 1970, Wal-Mart
grew to 276 in 1980, and
mushroomed to 1,500 in 1990.
In 1991, it overtook its long
established rivals to become the
nation's biggest retailer.
Then, surprisingly, Wal-Mart
began having trouble.
In 1992, Sam Walton died, and a
year later, with the economy
slow and sales sluggish, Wal-
Mart's stock price slumped
badly.
>> And Wal-Mart got very
nervous.
It got lower and lower and
approaching that $20 mark.
And that $20 mark seemed to be
the, like, the threshold.
"If it gets down below $20, it's
going to be a panic."
>> SMITH: Wal-Mart's new
management needed to crank up
sales and profits, and they hit
on a way to do both.
>> I saw this, as a store
manager, an influx, a giant
influx of imported merchandise
coming in.
The stores were inundated with
inventory.
Inundated.
I mean, we had so much of this
cheap crap floating around the
store, we didn't know what to do
with it.
>> SMITH: Lehman was so
overwhelmed with merchandise
that he called a vice president
at Wal-Mart headquarters to ask
what was going on.
>> He said, "Jon, you know, we
got to bring our profit in for
the quarter, for the month, for
the year.
And you know our stock price is
declining.
And you do understand, Jon, that
these imports have a high
margin, a high markup, and
they're going to help your
profit-and-loss statement.
They're going to help the
company's profit-and-loss
statement."
>> SMITH: The impact was
dramatic and immediate.
>> The margins on the
merchandise that were coming in
from the Wal-Mart import items
were incredible.
>> SMITH: Like what?
>> 60%, 70%, 80%.
You know, incredible.
>> SMITH: Compared with what
from American-made items?
>> Well, compare that to an
electric razor that you might be
making 20% on or 18% on or 22%.
>> SMITH: So, you're saying that
Wal-Mart is making much bigger
profits on these items that are
made in China or these low-wage
countries.
Is that right?
>> That's absolutely right.
>> SMITH: By the late '90s, Wal-
Mart was dependent on low-cost
Asian imports, and it began
pushing its American suppliers
to follow Wal-Mart to Asia.
>> Their message to us,
surprisingly, is: there's a
broad market out there.
If you want to focus on the
lowest-cost part of the market,
it's obvious that you can't do
that in the United States.
>> SMITH: So if you want to play
in that 25% of the Wal-Mart
market, you got to be in a very
low-cost place-- China or
someplace like China.
>> That's correct.
But China, practically speaking,
is it.
>> SMITH: And a number of the
suppliers have told us that they
have felt real strong,
particularly opening price point
pressure from Wal-Mart that has
effectively forced them to make
decisions to move overseas,
specifically to China.
>> I don't know that that is a
common practice.
I don't know... I can't even
confirm that that happened.
I suspect that this is a
legitimate occurrence that
you're citing, and there may be
some validity to that.
The sad truth is, because of
perhaps the pressure on price
because of this opening price
point initiative that we and
others have, and because the
pressure of costs on the other
side, that it's difficult to
make that... make ends meet, if
you're a business, by staying
here.
>> SMITH: You, as a producer of
socks for 30, 40 years, are you
now going to find that you need
to put a production facility in
China?
>> Absolutely.
For us to remain a viable
company over the long run, we
know we have to compete.
>> Wal-Mart basically tells its
suppliers, "We need to get those
products at 30% lower price.
You need to move to Asia.
You need to move to China,
because that will meet our
bottom-line price figures."
>> SMITH: Wal-Mart was
capitalizing on a watershed
moment on the world stage:
America's embrace of trade with
China in the late '90s.
With corporate America hailing
China as the new economic
frontier, President Clinton
signed a permanent trade
agreement with the Chinese.
>> Our administration has
negotiated an agreement which
will open China's markets to
American products made on
American soil, everything from
corn to chemicals to computers.
>> The picture painted was that
China was a big, emerging market
for U.S. exports, and that U.S.
workers and also U.S. companies,
companies that made their
products here, could profit
tremendously from the opening of
trade flows with such an
enormous country like China.
After all, it had 1.2 billion
people.
>> SMITH: To see firsthand how
the promise of a vast new market
for America was playing out, I
headed for China and the heart
of its new industrial
revolution: Shenzhen, South
China's miracle city.
20 years ago, this was all rice
fields.
Today, it's a sophisticated city
of seven million, its
astonishing rise orchestrated by
China's leaders and ignited by a
Chinese currency devaluation in
the mid-'90s that dramatically
lowered its export prices.
>> It's the opening of China.
China is a communist country
and, for the longest time, we
had closed doors.
And when they opened up to
Western businesses, the
floodgates opened, basically,
and it's something that you just
can't stop.
>> SMITH: The boom seemed
endless.
North of Shenzhen, I found an
entrepreneur who was among the
first to spot opportunity in the
new China.
>> Well, these are the products
we make.
This gives you some idea...
>> SMITH: Australian Donald Hay
came to South China 20 years
ago.
>> I was in this part of the
world, and I could see.
I saw the cheap products come
out of Japan, and I saw then
that market went to Korea, then
it went to Taiwan.
I said, "Hold it, hold it, hold
it.
The next one's China.
I got to get here."
>> SMITH: The backbone of
China's new industrial might is
the flood of young Chinese
pouring into this industrial
province, an area no bigger than
Missouri now teeming with more
than 40 million migrant workers.
They come to work and live at
the factories.
At Hay's company, Hayco, they
make $100 month, or about 50
cents an hour.
Other companies pay as little as
25 or 30 cents an hour.
>> They want to work.
They want to earn the money.
They want to get forward.
And they will do anything to
move forward.
>> SMITH: Today, Hayco supplies
electric toothbrushes and home
cleaning products to big
American companies like 3M,
Procter & Gamble, and Wal-Mart.
>> What's happened is the world
has come here as a marketplace.
It's like a supermarket for
manufacturing today.
And the quality is up to world
standards, in a long way past
world standards.
And that's just what's happened
in southern China.
>> SMITH: All across the region,
I saw evidence of the mass
corporate migration into China--
highways lined with factories
like airport hangars.
Hundreds of billions of dollars
in Western investment have
poured into China in the past 20
years.
And Wal-Mart is here, too.
It has 35 supercenters in China.
And behind one of them, here in
Shenzhen, I found Wal-Mart's
Global Procurement Center, a
huge buying operation tapping
directly into China's new
workshop of the world.
>> I interviewed people in Wal-
Mart's Global Procurement Center
in Shenzhen, and I asked them
about the total number of Wal-
Mart suppliers.
And I was told that Wal-Mart has
6,000 global suppliers.
80% of those suppliers are in
China.
>> SMITH: Several hundred
employees work at the
procurement center, keeping the
import pipeline full.
>> Wal-Mart gives Chinese
suppliers the specifications for
Wal-Mart products, and they
teach those suppliers how to
meet those specifications.
They have to do with price.
They have to do with quality.
They have to do with delivery
schedule.
So in a sense, Chinese suppliers
learn how to export to the U.S.
market through large retailers
like Wal-Mart.
>> SMITH: The Chinese suppliers
also learned just how tough Wal-
Mart can be.
>> Wal-Mart is... they are very
shrewd people.
They know that they have the
volume orders behind them and
they can go into a factory and
almost demand... "These are my
lists of demands, and this is
what I need."
>> SMITH: Kenneth Chan is a Hong
Kong entrepreneur who used to
supply Wal-Mart.
I've even heard sometimes that
they will call in three or four
manufacturers into one of their
little negotiating booths and
auction them off and say, "This
is what we want."
>> Yeah, the big reverse auction
kind of thing where they bid the
price as low as possible.
>> SMITH: What do they do?
>> Basically, they bring people
into their offices and just put
a product in front of you and
ask you to... everybody to bid
their cost on the product.
And it's very high pressure.
>> SMITH: Have you ever been in
that situation where you had to
bid, three or four people in the
same room?
>> Yeah, I have.
One of the things that I was
involved in, they were
inexpensive, less than... they
were probably, at the most,
maybe less than a dollar.
>> SMITH: So they're pounding
for a few pennies.
>> Yeah, they're only pounding
for, in a lot of cases, just one
penny, in fact.
>> SMITH: Now, the argument is
that this is getting a better
deal for the consumer.
Do you buy that or do you say...
>> No, it's getting a better
deal for the retailer or the
importer.
>> SMITH: For the Wal-Mart.
>> Yeah, for the Wal-Mart, for
the Targets, whoever does it.
>> SMITH: I'd heard about the
Chinese producing cheap, low-end
consumer goods.
What was striking to me was how
many Chinese companies were
going high-tech.
You may not have heard of TCL,
but you've seen their TVs and
maybe bought them, marketed
under brand names like Philips
and RCA.
And you'll be hearing more from
them soon.
They have a wide range of modern
electronic products, and they've
just merged with French
electronics giant Thomson.
Together, they're now the
largest TV maker in the world.
>> ( translated ): 99% of our
exports are for North America
and Europe, where we make a
large part of our profit.
We need to fulfill the demand of
our foreign customers.
>> SMITH: And only one U.S.
customer, it turns out, really
matters to TCL.
>> ( translated ): Selling to
Wal-Mart accounts for almost all
our sales to the U.S. market.
Wal-Mart keeps a very low
inventory and a fast turnaround,
which forces us to speed up our
production to catch up with the
international market.
>> SMITH: It was a familiar
refrain.
I heard it everywhere: ramping
up production, supplying Wal-
Mart, shipping to America,
And at Shenzhen's main port, I
saw a river of exports.
Ten years ago, this was all
barren land.
Today, Shenzhen is on the verge
of becoming the third busiest
port in the world, and Wal-Mart
is one of its biggest customers.
>> Wal-Mart has a very close
relationship with China.
China is the largest exporter to
the U.S. economy in virtually
all consumer goods categories.
Wal-Mart is the largest retailer
in the U.S. economy in virtually
all consumer goods categories.
>> SMITH: It sounds like a
commercial marriage made in
heaven.
>> Wal-Mart and China are a
joint venture, and both are
determined to dominate the U.S.
economy as much as they can.
>> SMITH: Wal-Mart estimates
that it imports $15 billion of
Chinese goods every year, and
maybe a lot more.
You've mentioned a figure of $15
billion, direct and indirect
imports.
Others have given us higher
estimates-- well into the
twenties and maybe $30 billion.
Is that possible?
>> I think it could... it's
possible it could be higher and
it could be lower.
The other thing you have to
remember is that we're growing
pretty significantly in terms of
sales.
So next year it will be higher,
and the year after that it's
likely to be higher, as well.
>> Wal-Mart is providing a
gateway into the American
economy for overseas suppliers
in China and elsewhere, and it's
doing it on a scale that has...
is unprecedented.
>> SMITH: Well, Cosco, that's a
Chinese ship, a Chinese ship,
yeah.
And a Japanese ship here.
>> But they're all carrying
Chinese cargo.
>> SMITH: At the other end of
the pipeline, I visited the port
of Long Beach in California.
I wanted to see how Washington's
promise of massive American-made
exports to China was working
out.
The port's communications
director is Yvonne Smith.
What are they shipping in and
what are we shipping back?
>> Well, we're bringing in
consumer products.
We're bringing in about $36
billion worth of machinery,
toys, clothing, footwear.
>> SMITH: $36 billion right here
in Long Beach?
>> $36 billion comes through
Long Beach from China alone.
Consumer products.
>> SMITH: And what are we
shipping back?
>> We're shipping out about $3
billion worth of raw materials.
We export cotton; we bring in
clothing.
We export hides; we bring in
shoes.
We export scrap metal; we bring
back machinery.
>> SMITH: So, they're doing all
the... we're like a third-world
country.
>> We're exporting waste paper,
containers full of waste paper;
we bring back cardboard boxes
with products inside them.
>> SMITH: Add it all up and the
U.S. had a record $120 billion
trade deficit with China last
year, and it's headed even
higher this year.
>> The myth of an enormous and
growing China market wound up
locking the United States into a
trading partnership with China
that had to benefit China much
more than it could benefit us.
>> SMITH: Because?
>> And the reason was China
would always be able to sell the
United States much more goods
than Americans could sell to
Chinese, because Americans had
the incomes that are needed to
buy Chinese products.
Chinese consumers overwhelmingly
don't have the incomes needed to
buy American products.
>> SMITH: So the whole idea was
wrong.
>> It was completely wrong.
>> When you look at the growth
of the trade deficit with China,
you could say that a very
conservative estimate is that we
have lost more than a million
jobs to China since the early
1990s.
>> I think it's impossible to
say that we've lost a million
jobs to China.
Trade policy or trade flows, one
way or another, don't have an
effect on overall employment
numbers.
They affect the kinds of jobs we
have.
And so some number of jobs have
definitely been eliminated
because of Chinese competition.
Another... Elsewhere in the
economy, other jobs have been
created because of Chinese
competition.
Because American consumers have
saved at Wal-Mart buying Chinese
goods, they've got more money in
their pocket to buy something
else, which creates business
opportunities for those other
businesses, which means they
hire workers they would not have
hired otherwise.
The net effect, most economists
think, is a wash.
>> Theoretically, the gains from
trade offset the losses from
trade.
But nothing says that there are
more winners than losers, and
nothing says that for the bottom
three-fourths of America that
they are net gainers.
In fact, I believe that most
people have been losers from
trade.
>> SMITH: The impact of China's
export boom has been felt all
across the U.S. in towns like
Circleville, Ohio, population
13,000, a Norman Rockwell kind
of town with its farms and
factories-- a solid citadel of
middle class America.
Former Republican Mayor Ron
Wunsch has lived in Circleville
all his adult life.
>> The community basically
generated its livelihood off of
the industry that came into the
community, came in in the 1940s
and 1950s.
Thomson Consumer Electronics was
the last large organization to
join back in the 1970s.
>> SMITH: So you had good living
standards, good jobs.
>> Good jobs, good living
standards, and good people in
the community.
>> SMITH: The French firm,
Thomson, which manufactures TV
sets, had the largest plant in
town, and it was a top
performer.
>> The Circleville plant in its
heyday-- probably around 1999,
2000-- was producing about ten
million pieces a year for the
production of television sets.
They made the glass components.
About a thousand workers, highly
motivated, highly productive.
Very efficient plants.
And at the time, it was one of
the most profitable contributors
to Thomson's corporate bottom
line.
>> SMITH: Steve Ratcliff was
among 1,000 workers who rode the
economic wave with Thomson.
As a machine operator, he made
up to $59,000 a year with
overtime.
>> I've done this job for the
last 30, almost 31 years, and
it's become my life.
And it's the only thing I've
ever known in my adult working
career was that job.
>> SMITH: But from 2002 onward,
the tide went out.
Plants in Circleville started
closing, and the big Thomson
plant suddenly faced sharp
foreign competition.
>> We started to see more
finished Chinese components
coming into the market.
A few brands come to mind like
Apex.
They were selling at prices that
most people couldn't even
manufacture at the U.S.
And they're being sold at the
same place we all buy TVs-- Best
Buy, Circuit City, Wal-Mart, and
Sears.
And, you know, all of a sudden,
you had this end pressure on
the retail price driven largely
by the Chinese producers.
>> SMITH: And oddly, Mayor
Wunsch says, the Thomson plant
ran into big trouble not just
because of the Chinese, but also
an American company.
>> In 2003, they lost a sizeable
portion of their total
production orders from a
particular customer.
>> SMITH: Sanyo?
>> Sanyo, I believe.
>> SMITH: They lost the Sanyo
contract because of what?
>> My understanding, based on
what I was told, was that an
end-use retailer told the Sanyo
people what they were going to
pay for the TV.
>> SMITH: And who was that
retailer?
>> My understanding is that that
was Wal-Mart.
>> Wal-Mart is going to say, "If
you want our space, you're going
to have to match our price or
figure something else to do."
And so it forces a supplier like
Sanyo to go back upstream to the
tube-- and in our case, glass
manufacturers-- to look for
price concessions.
But sometimes they're not there.
>> SMITH: So if they're not
there, then they go to China.
>> Then they go to China or
wherever they can to compete.
>> SMITH: Foreign competition
hit other TV makers, too.
In east Tennessee, I came across
the very last American-owned TV
maker desperately fighting to
hang on.
>> Well, it's a constant
struggle to survive.
I mean, it's a very competitive
market.
Right now, we've got about 700,
750...
>> SMITH: Yeah.
Tom Hopson is President of Five
Rivers Electronics, an assembler
of brand names like Philips,
Samsung, and RCA.
With foreign imports dominating
the small TV market, Hopson
concentrated on high-end, big-
screen sets, but even that was
no protection from the Chinese.
>> By the year 2003, they were,
like, increased 1,100% in
imports.
So, they just grew at an amazing
rate.
All of a sudden, they weren't
here.
They were shipping, you know,
maybe 100,000.
Now, they're shipping millions
and millions of televisions all
of a sudden from China.
>> SMITH: In three short years,
Chinese TV makers had grabbed
one-third of the high-end
market, about $350 million of
business.
But Hopson was convinced he was
up against more than just free
trade.
>> You know, we're here to
create jobs for our people in
Greenville, Tennessee.
And on a fair, level playing
field, if we can't compete, then
we go out of business like
anyone else.
But if it's unfair and it's
illegal and someone's doing
something to damage and put
these people out of jobs, we're
going to try to do something to
keep these jobs.
>> SMITH: Hopson turned to
Washington.
He filed a trade complaint,
charging the Chinese with
dumping high-end TVs onto the
American market, selling at
below free market cost.
>> It's not fair trade.
It's not free trade.
The Chinese are pricing their
products in a manner contrary to
the obligations they undertook
when they joined the World Trade
Organization a few years ago.
The Chinese system has built-in
advantages that no one else in
the world has.
Their currency is undervalued by
we estimate about 40%.
Their workers are not treated
fairly in terms of worker
rights.
The government provides
subsidies to Chinese producers
at preferential interest rates
that may not even have to be
repaid.
It's a rigged system.
>> SMITH: Chinese TV makers
vigorously fought the case,
including TCL.
Tom Hopson was prepared to take
on the Chinese, but stunned at
whom else he had to fight.
Which side did Wal-Mart come
down on?
>> Well, Wal-Mart chose the side
of the Chinese, and basically
Wal-Mart spent a lot of time and
effort at the International
Trade Commission hearings
testifying against us and our
case.
>> SMITH: When I asked a Wal-
Mart spokesman, he said he could
not address this specific case.
On the question of dumping, does
Wal-Mart have a position on
dumping cases?
>> I think we should weigh in if
we feel a need, if there is an
issue that we see that perhaps
needs a perspective from the
retail trade ourselves, or if
we're asked to.
>> SMITH: And do you see Wal-
Mart's position weighing in on
behalf of the American
manufacturers or on behalf of
the foreign companies that are
supplying?
>> I think it has to be a case-
by-case basis.
>> Why would an American company
fight American companies and
American jobs unless it was for
their own profit?
I don't understand that.
Why would Wal-Mart and other
companies actually testify to
support jobs in China instead of
American jobs, unless there was
some benefit to them?
>> SMITH: Last April, Five
Rivers won its case.
The International Trade
Commission determined that
Chinese producers were illegally
dumping high-end TVs on the U.S.
market.
It imposed new import duties,
effectively raising Chinese
prices and making Five Rivers
more competitive.
If you had had a bad case or
you'd lost this case, would you
have shut down?
>> Absolutely.
There's no doubt in my mind that
if we had lost this case, this
factory would not be in
business.
>> SMITH: But it was already too
late for other U.S.-based TV
suppliers, like that Thomson
plant in Circleville, Ohio.
Last May, the plant was finally
shut down.
Did Thomson say that it was
shutting the plant down because
of competition from China?
>> Exactly.
They basically told us that they
could buy the glass from their
competitors coming out of China
cheaper than what we could
actually make it for at our
plant.
>> SMITH: Suddenly, a thousand
workers like Steve Ratcliff lost
the jobs of a lifetime.
>> You kind of feel like you've
been a failure in a way.
You worry a lot.
Like I said, I worry about
whether or not I'll be able to
find work with, you know,
comparable wages and benefits,
and just what the future will
be.
>> Job opportunities for the
kids coming out of high school
in this area today are very much
lower than they were ten years
ago.
There are a lot of people in
this community who have families
that the father worked 30 or 40
years at a plant, then the son
got employed, and a third
generation that has been
employed at some of the plants.
And those are gone now.
And there's no opportunity for
that.
>> SMITH: What are those high
school kids going to do?
>> We don't know.
We don't know.
>> SMITH: Ironically, it may be
Wal-Mart to the rescue.
One new job opportunity in
Circleville will soon be a new
Wal-Mart supercenter that just
broke ground on a patch of Ohio
farmland right next door to the
now vacant Thomson TV plant.
How would you feel about working
for Wal-Mart?
>> I don't know where I'd really
want to work for Wal-Mart or
not, to be honest.
>> SMITH: Why not?
>> Wal-Mart's a big contributor,
as far as bringing in a lot of
the foreign products, the
cheaper-made products and so
forth.
And quite frankly, that's some
of what's going on right now
with what put us out of
business, is the foreign
competition.
>> SMITH: For those who lost
jobs at Thomson, Wal-Mart jobs
represent a steep cut in pay--
almost half of the $15 to $16 an
hour they made at Thomson, and a
far cry from the pension, health
care, and job security benefits
long the norm in U.S. industry.
>> Joseph Schumpeter, who was an
Austrian economist, famous, used
the phrase "creative
destruction."
What he meant was, that one mode
of production, one form of
capitalist economics comes to
the fore.
It's more efficient, it's more
powerful, it destroys,
literally, other forms of
production, other firms.
And that's what Wal-Mart has
done.
It has discovered, with this
low-wage model, with a
technologically efficient... its
global reach, it is a sort of
new model of world capitalism,
really, beginning in America and
the rest of the world.
And it is destroying--
creatively, but nevertheless,
destroying-- competitors and
really other ways of thinking
about the way the world works.
>> ♪ O, say can you see
By the dawn's early light... ♪
>> SMITH: I guess my question
for you is, is Wal-Mart good for
America?
Is this strategy of Wal-Mart
good for America?
>> I think Wal-Mart is good for
America.
Wal-Mart is doing what America
is all about, the American
market economy is all about,
which is producing things
consumers want to buy.
And Wal-Mart is offering
consumers a wide range of goods
at rock-bottom prices, and
therefore, it is meeting the
market test.
( cheers and applause )
>> Give me a "W!"
>> W!
>> Give me an "A!"
>> A!
>> Give me an "L!"
>> L!
>> Well, if people were only
consumers buying things, lower
prices would be just good.
But people also are workers who
need to earn a decent standard
of living.
And the dynamics that create
lower prices at Wal-Mart and
other places are also
undercutting the ability of
many, many workers to earn
decent wages and benefits and
have a stable life.
>> We absolutely believe that we
are raising the standard of
living through lowering the cost
of goods for people.
There are those who criticize us
and make assertions that there
is somehow a negative to that.
And it's a premise that I simply
reject.
>> ♪ I see skies of blue
and clouds of white... ♪
>> SMITH: In the end, is Wal-
Mart good for America?
>> If you want these low prices,
then you go buy your products
from Wal-Mart.
But what does that actually do
for this country?
It's putting people out of work,
that's what it's doing.
And it's lowering our standard
of living.
That's the bottom line.
>> ♪ What a wonderful world. ♪
( cheers and applause )
>> There's more to explore about
our report at Frontline's web
site, where you'll find a
closer look at how Wal-Mart
became the world's most
powerful retailer, and the
secrets of its success,
analysis of Wal-Mart's close
relationship with China, and
its ramifications in the U.S.
and globally.
>> Wal-Mart and China are a
joint venture.
>> Plus extended interviews with
Wal-Mart insiders and
observers.
>> It's more efficient, it's
more powerful.
>> And two radio reports about
Wal-Mart by American Radio
Works.
Then join the discussion at
pbs.org.
>> Partial funding for this
program was provided by the
Nathan Cummings Foundation.
Frontline is made possible by
contributions to your PBS
station from viewers like you.